---
layout: single
title: New direction for my blog
date: 2016-01-30
categories: faith life
---

It's very long time that I wrote anything in my blog.  For last many
years, my blog posts were mostly technical.  Sometimes I have written
personal things in my blog.  Now onwards I am thinking to write both
personal as well as technical things in my blog.

On February 14, 2013 I wrote this in my old [blog]: "I started writing
blog in October 2004.  Most of my blog entries were technical, very
few times I wrote personal things.  This blog post is written just to
tell those who read my blog that I believe in Jesus Christ.  I
accepted Jesus Christ as my Lord and Savior in 1995.  However, due to
resistance from my family, I couldn't continue fellowship with other
believers and so I started backsliding.  In August 2011, God helped me
to find a good fellowship in Bangalore where I live now."

[blog]: http://baijum.blogspot.in/2013/02/something-personal.html

Even after that brief update, I couldn't write anything about Jesus
Christ in my blog.  So, this is a new start.

From the above note, you can see that my experience dates back to
1995.  I will try to recollect those days here.  It was during my high
school days that I started reading Bible.  I used to listen to many
radio programs during this time.  I received a copy of new testament
(part of bible) after sending a mail to an address I got from one of
the radio program.  I remember reading the new testament many times.
Later, I accepted Jesus Christ as my Lord and Savior in 1995.
There was no one I could speak about my new experience at that time.
After some time a pastor came to our place.  One day, my father met
the pastor and during their conversation my father mentioned that I
read bible.  Then he came to our home and invited me to join the
worship happening in his home.  That was a new experience for me.  I
started going to worship regularly.  Initially my parents were fine
with that.  But they couldn't support me anymore when I stopped going
to temples.  This lead to lots of family problems.  Due to these kind
of issues, one day, I decided to take some break.  That was one of the
major setback in my life.  Then for a long period in my life, I missed
worship, reading Bible and fellowship with other believers.

I am thinking to write more about Jesus Christ in my blog.  I am
looking forward to your feedback.  You can reach out to me via
twitter, facebook, email or mobile/whatsapp.  See the bottom of this
blog for contact details.  God bless you!
